Vanderbilt University\
Leadership, Policy and Organizations\
Class Number 9951\
Fall 2017\

\

William R. Doyle\
Office: 207D Payne\
Office Hours: Monday and Wednesday 12:30-3 or by Appointment\
w.doyle@vanderbilt.edu\
phone (615) 322-2904\

12 pt

Course Overview
===============

The overview includes an introduction to the course, guidelines on
grading, and required texts.

Introduction
------------

This course is the first of a three semester series of courses designed
to introduce you to the *practice* of research, particularly the applied
side of quantitative research. The goal of this course to help you to
prepare a paper that can be presented at a major research conference
and, hopefully, submitted to a journal for publication.

To accomplish this goal, you will choose from among publicly available
datasets. You will identify a research topic, then later a research
question. You will create a dataset using the publicly available
sources. By the end of the semester, you will have a properly formatted
and cleaned dataset, with auxiliary information from other sources
included. Next semester we will analyze this dataset. By the end of May,
you will complete a paper based on this analysis.

Along the way, you will develop skills that will be helpful in future
work using any kind of data. This class has a strong emphasis on using
programming skills to aid in the replication of work and to simplify
complex analyses.

Grading
-------

Evaluation for the course will be based on the following factors:

*Assignments: 50%*

There will be weekly assignments, pass/fail. Late assignments will not
be accepted. These assignments will account for half of your grade.
Collaboration on assignments is fine, however, many of the assignments
will ask you to work with variables and datasets of your own choosing.

*Summary Paper and Codebook: 50%*

At the end of the semester, you will need to present the results of your
data collection efforts, with a summary paper of no more than five pages
of text, accompanied by properly formatted tables and graphics. The
summary paper and codebook will be due on December 6. You will present
your work to the rest of the class on December 6.

Texts
-----

Baum, C (2006) *An Introduction to Modern Econometrics Using STATA*.
College Station: STATA Press

Long, J.S. (2009) *The Workflow of Data Analysis Using Stata*. College
Station: STATA Press

For this semester, both of these books are *optional*: I will recommend
a few chapters from both as the semester progresses, but the class notes
are the only required reading.

Software
--------

You need to have access to a working version of Stata, (at least v
13.0). Stata is installed on computers on Peabody campus, including
Wyatt 132, and on stations in the Peabody library. You are not required
to purchase Stata, but you will need to use it for class assignments.

If you do purchase Stata, you will need Stata IC (standard version).
Vanderbilt has what’s called a gradplan with Stata under which you can
purchase the software at greatly reduced prices. Stata SE is a
more-powerful version of Stata that is useful for the larger datasets
many of you may be working with.

Honor Code {#sec:honor-code}
----------

For this course, you are bound by the terms of the Peabody Honor System.
Any breach of academic honesty, including cheating, plagiarism, or
failing to report a known or suspected violation of the Code will be
reported to the Honor Council. In particular, papers must assign credit
to the sources you use. Material borrowed from another–quotations,
paraphrases, key words, or ideas–must be credited following appropriate
citation procedures (footnotes and bibliography). As mentioned above,
collaboration *is* permitted on assignments but *is not* permitted on
your summary paper and codebook.

If you have any doubts, please ask me for clarification. Uncertainty
about the application of the Honor Code does not excuse a violation.

Schedule for Meetings
=====================

The schedule for all class meetings is as follows:

August 29
---------

*Topics*:

Class introduction

September 5
-----------

*Topics*: STATA Basics

*Assignments:* Assignment 1 due September 3, midnight

Septermber 12
-------------

*Topics*:

Working with publicly available datasets

*Assignments:* Assignment 2 due September 10, midnight

September 19
------------

*Topics*:

Dataset manipulation: Collapsing, merging, bending the data to your will

*Assignments:* Assignment 3 due September 17, midnight

September 26
------------

*Topics*: More dataset manipulation: One to many merging, many to one
merging, appending datasets

*Assignments:* Assignment 4 due September 24, midnight

Summary research area due

October 3
---------

*Topics*:

Sampling: Simple sampling designs

*Assignments:* Assignment 5 due October 1, midnight

October 10
----------

*Topics*: Sampling: Complex sampling designs

*Assignments:* Assignment 6 due October 8, midnight

October 17
----------

*Topics*:

Data Cleaning

*Assignments:* Assignment 7 due October 15, midnight

October 24
----------

*Topics*:

Data Validation

*Assignments:* Assignment 8 due October 22, midnight

Research questions due.

October 31
----------

*Topics*:

Descriptive Statistics: Tabular and Graphical Approaches

*Assignments:*

Assignment 9 due October 29, midnight

November 7
----------

*Topics*:

An Introduction to Programming: Using Macros

*Assignments:*

Assignment 10 due November 5, midnight

November 14
-----------

*Topics*:

Further graphical approaches to describing data

Assignment 11 due November 12, midnight

November 21
-----------

No Class, Thanksgiving Break

November 28
-----------

*Topics*:

Topic TBA: based on student work.

December 5
----------

*Topics*:

Class Presentations

*Assignments:*

Summary Papers, Do-File and Codebooks due before class, December 5.

